It's quite a stressful condition to be in a
situation where you're having your first child
and you get there, of course, when there was also
another woman, a young woman, that was in labor at
the same time. And I didn't really understand all
the things that were going on, but of course I
wanted to see my wife get some attention. As it
turns out, the doctor was running back and forth
from one patient to another. And I guess I was
sitting there with this young husband of the
Indian girl who was also having a baby. And he came
out and explained that they were having a very
difficult time with her and they really didn't
know if they were going to be able to save either the
baby or the mother and of course for me this was
almost like striking terror into the into the
heart and but I calmed down and you know I realized
that we were dealing with a very difficult
situation and so the fact that Joy wasn't getting
much attention, I realized that, you know, there
was some very difficult things going on. As it
turns out, she actually had the baby in her street
clothes because, you know, there really wasn't
time to do much other than just sort of react. It was
almost like, I guess, in the United States that you
have a baby in a taxi cab or something like that.
They were certainly in the delivery room, but
there was, I guess, very little electricity.
Electricity was always sort of going off and on,
and water was always going off and on, and so you can
never guarantee that you're going to have really
any of the critical things when you need them. And
so it was rather primitive conditions to have our
first child, but as it turns out, everything
worked out. And did she have leave from the
university, or did you all have to take turns
taking care of the child? I guess the classes were
already over, We were going to be replaced by new
volunteers that were coming in to take over the
next year's teaching classes. So basically what
we were doing was kind of interacting with the new
volunteers who were coming in. There would be a
little bit of overlap until they started into
their new program. And so we were just kind of into a
handoff stage then.
So I guess at that point. That's also summer
vacation. Yeah, it was going into the summer
vacation. And we would be, I guess, preparing to
teach the high school kids again for the entrance
exam type of work. Did you feel that you were
helping the locals on a day-to-day basis? Well, I
think so. There was always question whether they
saw you that much differently from, you know, any
university professor. As it turns out, the pay for
university professors there was rather poor, and
most of them had to have two jobs anyway. So, you
know, you could say one or the other jobs was kind of
secondary.
So, they saw at least one person that was given
full-time to the job, and maybe the other person
had to hold down several jobs.
But, I don't know, I think they were more curious
about
foreigners and they were always wanting to come
and talk to you about other kinds of situations,
mostly political ones. There's a lot of political
activism in Latin American universities and so
they like to get into a lot of political
discussions and so they would certainly take the
opportunity to draw you into discussions on
various kinds of political issues.
And once again, how many years did you
participate, and what were they? From the years
1964 to 1966.
So each one of the Peace Corps assignments was
generally two years. And we started in June. The
first part of the assignment was actually a
three-month period of training in the University
of Washington in Seattle. So that's the reason
why, even though we didn't get into the country
until, say, August or September, that our Peace
Corps two-year assignment actually ended in June
because of the sort of three-month training
period when you first start out. They try to gear it
so that you get in country at the time just before
the new classes are going to start. And that will
end at the time that the second year's classes
ends. How many other volunteers were stationed
locally, or you know, that you could interact
with? When I originally got into country, I was
with three other Peace Corps volunteers, and we
were all, we all started off living with the same
Bolivian family, and then It wasn't too long after
that that we all kind of split up and moved in with
different families. So I think there was probably
maybe seven or eight Peace Corps volunteers that
were working in La Paz and then we would see other
volunteers that were working up on the Altiplano
occasionally when they came back in. There was a
Peace Corps office in La Paz and so we saw a lot of the
people when they would travel back in to the Peace
Corps office. They may have some business to take
care of in the office. Maybe they were trying to get
some additional medical materials or they would
just come back in for periodic debriefings and so
forth. Maybe they also had to come in for physical
exams. And so we did interact with some of the
people out in the outlying areas.
Did they come back? They were stationed in more
isolated villages. Did they come back with any
interesting stories about what they
encountered? Well, some of them were up on the
Altiplano living in very small Indian villages.
These people would either be in public health or in
community development. And we also had other
Peace Corps volunteers that were in the jungles up
in Rurinabaki and Ribera Alta and so forth, up in
what they call the Alto Beni.
Of course, there were a lot of sort of jungle
stories that came back from there about their
experiences with things like pythons and wild
boars and all this sort of stuff.
But they're just kind of quite challenging things
that can happen. Okay, see you later. See you late
tonight. Yeah. Bye. Bye. There was one situation
where
in the Altiplano, they drink this drink called
corn beer, which is chicha. The way they brew it,
you actually chew the corn mash, and then they let
the saliva go into this bowl and then it starts to
ferment and then it gradually turns into what they
call this corn beer. And so some of the volunteers
were at a party and they felt that it was going to be,
if they didn't uh, drink this, uh, this chicha, you
know, that, uh, they're probably gonna, uh,
create some kind of an incident where they would,
people would feel that, you know, they were, uh,
you know, not taking advantage of all the good
things that they were being offered. And, uh, so
they decided to go ahead and taste it. It tasted
pretty good. Uh, and later on when they were on a, a
bus trip, uh, of course they, they got, uh, really
some intestinal cramps and so they were looking
for an opportunity when the bus stopped
to relieve some of their pressure that they had and
so they had to run off into the bushes and
one of them had actually some accident with his
bowels and And so he was trying to hang his shorts up
on this little fence that were there and then
before he realized what was going on. This pig,
there were some pigs in the area and they actually
came over and grabbed his shorts and ate the
shorts. So, here he was kind of in a situation where
he was going to have to make the rest of the trip
without his undershorts. But, you know, he just
kind of learned to roll with the punches.
But there were all kinds of situations. Another
instance where the difference in cultures and the
way you have to do things was one of the Peace Corps
volunteers that was living with another Bolivian
family in La Paz. They were trying to explain to her
how to heat the water in the bathtub. You fill the
bathtub up, and then you put in this electrical
resistor, which is called a raya flotante. And so
she had this thing in there, and it was heating the
water. And they failed to tell her never to stick
her hand in or, you know, never to get into the water
without first turning the, Raya Floatante off
because you're actually electrifying the water
and water is a tremendous conductor of
electricity. Anyway, she was all prepared for her
bath and just kind of stuck her finger into the
water to see if the water was warm enough and if she
could take the Raya Floatante out and of course she
got a tremendous electrical shock and she was flew
out of the bathroom and actually ran out into the
house where the rest of the Bolivian family was.
And here she is, naked. And of course, they had to
calm her down. And they were, I guess, all very
happy that she wasn't electrocuted. She was one of
the volunteers. Yes, she was one of the
volunteers. But you never realize all these kind
things that we take for granted. A simple thing
like a shower and sometimes how difficult it is to
adjust to these sort of new conditions.
I guess I'm going to double check this. Okay, my
next question. You were mentioning about showers
and things like that. What were your facilities
like? Were your living quarters We actually had
pretty nice quarters with the Bolivian families
that we were living with. And then after we got
married, then we had a little apartment that we
took. And other than the fact that there was no hot
water and that there was no central heating in
order to say even read or prepare for your lesson
plans, or if you wanted to read Time magazine in the
evening, you had to basically have sweaters and
jackets on in the house, and then because the
electricity was probably going to go out, you also
had to have a lot of candles and lanterns ready for
the time when there was sort of a planned
electrical brownout almost daily and also the
water was generally turned off by say like eight
o'clock in the evening and what they actually had
to do is that they had real old plumbing systems and
so the plumbing actually the sewage sort of was
just backing up and sitting there during the
daytime and so then there was one main conduit that
they had to use to drain off all of the sewage so at
about eight o'clock they would turn off the water
and then open this main valve and then you know run
all the sewage down through that and so you
couldn't flush the toilet or anything like that
any time after 8 o'clock in the evening. So that was
always pretty tough.
But things were like
we had to
make special accommodations for few things that
you don't normally have. There were a lot of fleas
in the apartment and we didn't realize, you know,
we knew we were getting bit by something. And my
wife, you know, she would always be complaining
that there were things in the bed that were
crawling on her. so I never, they weren't
bothering me as much, and maybe I had sour blood or
something, but she was being bitten by these
fleas, and eventually, and of course it was very
cold there, and so she had these black tights on
that she was sleeping with, and she actually got
one of the fleas trapped in this mesh of these
tights that she had on. And that's when I first
really believed that they were fleas there. So we
had to dust the bed down with flea powder. And
eventually, we were able to control that thing.
Yeah, there certainly are some different kinds of
challenges that you have.
Did you feel that the locals appreciated your
presence? And what groups did, what groups
didn't? Well, certainly the blind girls
appreciated all the attention that they got. I
think the high school students from the Tupac
Atari night school genuinely appreciated all the
efforts that we made to try to prepare them for
their entrance into college. Perhaps there was
not as much general acceptance of the college
students themselves. By the time you get into
college, you get a little more jaded, and I think
you can say that one class was really interesting
or you felt that you got some new insights to things
because they were taught in a different way than
you were used to. So you can never really judge what
kind of impact you're having on the people. But I
think we also provided a lot of guidance and
opportunities for some of the brighter students
that were there to try to make it easier for them to
find education in other countries or in the United
States or find opportunities for them to pursue
their own studies and maybe go on to graduate
school and perhaps they wouldn't have thought of
those kinds of angles in order to help finance
their continued studies. And I'm sure, of course,
those people were all very genuinely
appreciative of the Peace Corps efforts. And of
course, all the people that were working in public
health and community development and actually
making living conditions better for the locals.
That's always something that is appreciated. But
then there were always the feeling that, and
particularly in countries like Bolivia, where
they had just had a revolution, They always were
very suspicious of Peace Corps volunteers and
bringing in outside and foreign ideas because
they kind of felt that it was sowing seeds of
continuous revolution. If you teach the Indians a
better way of doing things and if you start to
generate in them the idea that nothing is
necessarily has to be acceptable or that they can
always do better, then it creates a tension which
perhaps, you know, does foment some
revolutionary type ideas. And that's always
something that was sort of a delicate balance of
whether you could continue the various programs
in country or whether they were going to pull the
plug because they really didn't trust what was
happening. And a lot of countries decided not to
continue Peace Corps,
particularly in countries where there was a
ruling class and there was a disadvantaged class
of people. And if you spent too much time trying to
improve the conditions of the disadvantaged
class and make them feel that they really could do
better for themselves, then obviously how far do
you go with that before the ruling class is going to
say, hey, that's enough of this kind of activity.
This is kind of a broad question, but how did the
Peace Corps affect your life positively and
negatively, looking back? Well, it certainly
changed my life on many fronts. First off, I had
never really been out of the United States when I
joined the Peace Corps program, so it certainly
gave me a lot more of outgoing and global
perspective than I had before. And the fact that I
met the woman that I fell in love with and married
her in the Peace Corps. Both of our Peace Corps
volunteer experiences were something that we
shared a whole lifetime. I think it has profoundly
changed how I view things. You realize all of the
news when you hear things on the news that are of an
international nature, we realize how slanted
things can be if you're getting just a news
reporting of something, whereas if you're
actually in the country and know what's going on,
it can be very much different. So you realize that
there's a very difficult time in actually
reporting news and avoiding the slanting of news
so that if you're into international affairs you
really do have to to look at a lot of different
reports of things and make your own judgment as to
what conditions are really like because there is a
lot of opportunity to you know, cut things short
and perhaps not come up with the real situation.
I think overall I felt that the Peace Corps
experience was very positive for me and I actually
decided that I wanted to become a university
educator and go back and get my PhD. After I did my
two years in the Peace Corps, I went back to the
University of Missouri and got a PhD. But at the
time that I graduated in 1969, it seemed like there
was a lot of competition at that time. I started
writing to various universities to send my
application and they would say, you know, we
appreciate your application, you're applicant
number 134 for a teaching job at various
universities throughout the country. I realized
that it was not going to be easy to break into the
teaching at the university level in the U.S. and at
the same time I was offered a job to go with an oil
company, Pan American Petroleum in Denver,
Colorado. So I just had to make the choice and I
decided to go into the petroleum business and
that's where I've been ever since. I found that was
something that really appealed to me as well. So I
decided to make a career in that. And how that came
from the effect of the Peace Corps had on you? Well,
it certainly made it more interesting that oil
companies were working in many around-the-world
type of activities. And later on, after spending
seven years in domestic exploration, I joined the
international group and actually went overseas
again. And I lived in Argentina for two years, and I
lived in Indonesia and Jakarta for five years. And
I was also in Japan for about nine months. So I did
spend a great deal of time. And I have made a lot of
trips into different foreign countries. And so I
think that the Peace Corps experience just kind of
made it a lot easier to think about living and
working environments outside the United States
and actually interacting with other cultures and
it wasn't nearly as foreign an idea. So I think it
kind of broadened my whole horizon and gave me the
feeling that The world is really a lot smaller than
it looks and feels and that people living and doing
things in different parts of the world are really
very interesting and really not that much
different from us. You just have to understand
them and take advantage of all the different ideas
and concepts that they have.
After finishing your tour of duty, did you feel
that you and the other Peace Corps volunteers you
were in contact with, did you feel like you
fulfilled the duty that you were sent to do and the
promises that you, or commitments you made to the
people there? Well, like I said before, it's
always very difficult to judge the effectiveness
of any particular Peace Corps program. The fact
that they continued the program for many years
after we left I think was at least some indication
that the country itself felt that it was
fulfilling a need. Most of the volunteers had
generally pretty positive outlooks when they
came out. They felt that it was an advantage both to
them and they hoped equally an advantage to the to
the country itself they felt that they had made
impact on a lot of the people's lives that they made
good friends of in country we also made friends
with a lot of the faculty that we worked with and
these experiences I think were you know it's
always important to transfer academic ideas from
the Peace Corps volunteers to the faculty members
and you never really know how important that is.
It's sort of cross-pollination and I think that
probably is always healthy. So overall I think
most of the people felt that it was a valuable
program. They felt that they benefited from it and
many of them were eager to, you know, either go to a
different Peace Corps environment. Some even,
you know, went to other countries or continued to
serve after their Peace Corps effort was finished
in one country. My sister worked for four years in
Tanzania in her assignments, and she felt it was a
very positive experience
as well.